---
layout: post
title:  "Sexual harrasment at work place"
date:   2021-02-14 11:00:00
categories: mediator feature
tags: featured
image: /assets/article_images/2014-11-30-mediator_features/night-track.JPG
image2: /assets/article_images/2014-11-30-mediator_features/night-track-mobile.JPG
---
**Sexual**  **harassment at workplace**

**Research objectives**

1. Analysis of POSH Act.

1. Rise in complaints after implementation of Vishakha guidelines.
2. Challenges implement POSH provisions.

**Research method**

In this paper the method of research I have used is doctrinal research method. In this method the research is done by pieces and pieces of evidence, documents which are the sources we can rely on , rather than the people and society which are more complex. The scope of doctrinal research ifs wide enough to study the issue , it is a study based on facts , articles , provisions and statutes related to the topic.

**Abstract**

Sexual harassment is when a person touches other person intentionally without their consent or will. Sexual harassment at workplace attacks a person&#39;s dignity, the work environment, and the harassed person feels unsafe to work there, it also makes them feel powerless , fearful and afraid of other people whom they has to face everyday. There has been many cases of sexual harassment at workplace due to which the lives of people became miserable and they had to face many problems socially as well as economically, to deal with this, prevention of sexual harassment of women at workplace act was enacted in 2013, it is also known as the POSH act.

**Introduction**

Sexual harassment has become an issue worth concerning ,it not only puts in jeopardy a person&#39;s safety but their private lives too . Women are safe nowhere , neither at home nor at workplace . Since the women has started working they have been harassed sexually at the workplace and since then sexual harassment has taken new dimensions.Being harassed sexually at the workplace not only threatens a woman&#39;s right to equality (art. 14 and 15 of constitution of India) , right to life (art. 21) but also creates a belligerent work environment, it also affects their performance at work which weakens them from the competing world . It affects them socially as well as economically but most of allit affects them emotionally and mentally. Sexual harassment requires an unwelcome sexual behaviour firstly, we need to understand &quot;what is unwelcome&quot; , any conduct or behaviour is unwelcome if the recipient does not consent to it and regards it as offensive,any type of jokes, comments , gestures etc. which create awkwardness and either gender regard it as offensive and inappropriate.

The government adopted the vishakha guidelines to prevent the sexual harassment of women at workplace , ministry of women and child development enacted the sexual harassment of women at workplace (prevention, prohibition and redressal) Act in 2013. The same year , acts such as sexual harrasment, stalking and voyeurism were criminalised.

**background**

A social worker named bhanwari devi tried to stop a child marriage and subsequently got brutally raped by some gujjar men. She lodged a case against them , however the offenders were acquitted by the trial court. This inspired many women to fight against the sexual harassment through NGOs and self help groups.

Earlier , before 1997 there was no systematic approach to how the issue of sexual harassment of a woman should be dealt by an employer. The complaint under section &quot;354&quot; and &quot;509&quot; of Indian Penal Code was lodged where former section deals with &#39;criminal assault of women to outrage women&#39;s modesty&#39; and the latter punishes a person or persons for using words, gestures or act intended to insult the modesty of a women.

the interpretation of &quot;outraging women&#39;s modesty&quot; was left upto police officer&#39;s discretion. The situation of the harassed women was dejected.

In 1997, in case of Vishakha and Ors VS State of Rajasthan, when Vishakha and the group of other women filed a PIL against the state of Rajasthan and the central government to administer the fundamental rights of working women under articles 14, 15 and 21 a

of the indian constitution the court took into consideration the international conventions and norms remarkably for the purpose to guarantee gender equality (art 14 and 15) , right to work with human dignity and right to life and liberty (art. 21) . The petition resulted in what we know today the &quot;Vishakha guidelines&quot;. The bench consisted of J .S. Verma the then CJI , Sujata Manohar and B.N. Kirpal provided the definition and the guidelines to deal with sexual harassment at workplace.

Sexual harassment includes such unwelcome behaviours :-
1. Physical contact;
2. Demand or request of sexual favours;
3. Sexually coloured remarks;
4. Showing pornography;
5. Any other unwelcome verbal or non verbal conduct of sexual nature.

In 2013, the ministry of women and child development enacted the Prevention Of Sexual Harassment act also known as POSH act, with the objective of creating a hostile free and safe work environment.

**Some key provisions of**

**POSH act**

1. **Aggrieved women :-**

All women working or visiting any workplace

- Regular employee
- Temporary employee
- Ad Hoc
- Daily wages

b. Engaged directly or indirectly

c. Working for remuneration

d. Terms of employment may be expressed or implied

e. Could be co-worker , contract worker , probationer , trainee , apprentice , visitor

2. **Workplace :-**

Any place visited by the employee arising out of or during the course of employment including transport provided by the employer

1. Covers organised and unorganised sectors
2. Government organisations
3. Private sector organisations
4. Hospitals or nursing homes
5. Dwelling house

**Forms of sexual harassment at workplace**

Quid Pro Quo :-

This refers to &quot;this for that&quot;. In this the person is harassed by expressly or impliedly promising her preferential treatment in employment.

- The person is expressly or impliedly threatened about her present and future employment status.
- Hostile work environment :-
- Creating hostile , intimidating or an offensive work environment
- Humiliating treatment likely to affect her health and safety.

**Duties of employer**

Every employer shall -

1. Provide safe working environment at the workplace , which includes safety from the persons coming into the contact at workplace;
2. Display at any conspicuous place in the workplace the penal consequences of sexual harassments and order constituting the internal committee under this law ;
3. Organise awareness programs and workshops at regular intervals for sensitising the employees with the provisions of the act and orientation programmes for the members of the internal committee in the manner as may be prescribed;
4. Provide necessary facilities to then internal and local committee , as the case may be for dealing with cases and conducting inquiry;
5. Assist in securing the attendance of the respondent and witnesses before the local and internal committee, as the case may be;
6. Make available such information to the local committee and internal committee the as the case may be , as it may require having regard to the complaint made under this law;
7. Provide assistance to the woman if she so chooses to file a complaint in relation to the offence under IPC (45 of 1860) or any other law for the time being in force ;
8. Cause to initiate action , under IPC (45 of 1860) or any other law for the time being in force, against the perpetrator if the aggrieved woman so desires , where the perpetrator is not an employee, of the workplace where the incident took place;
9. Treat sexual harassment as a misconduct under the service rules and initiate action for such misconduct;
10. Monitor timely submission of reports by an internal committee
# 
.

**Complaints committee**

For the redressal of the issue a complaints committee shall be constituted either by the

employer or by the appropriate government. This implies that there can be two types of complaints committees , the one which is made by the employer is called &quot;internal complaints committee&quot; and the one constituted by the appropriate government is called the &quot;local complaints committee&quot; . Section 4 of the act says that an internal complaints committee shall be constituted at all the divisional or sub-divisional levels or different different places of all administrative units of the workplace .

It shall consist of :

1. A presiding officer who shall be a woman employed at a senior level at the workplace amongst the other employees and if the senior level woman employee is not available , the presiding officer can be appointed from the other offices or administrative units.
2. In case the other office or administrative unit does not have a senior woman employee , the presiding officer can be appointed from any other workplace of the same employer or other department or organisation.
3. The internal complaints committee shall also consist of maximum two members from amongst employees preferably be committed to the cause of women or they must have experience in social work or have legal knowledge.
4. One member shall be from any NGOs and should be committed to the cause of women, that person should familiar with the issues related to the sexual harassment.

Every member and the presiding officer hold the office till the term of three years from the date of their nomination.

The appropriate government may notify a DM or ADM, collector or deputy collector as a district officer and every district officer shall constitute a committee to receive complaints on sexual harassment from establishments where the internal complaints committee has not been constituted due to less than ten workers or if the complaint is against the employer himself.

The local complaints committee shall consist of:
a. a chairperson amongst the eminent women in the field of social work or committed to the cause of women.

b. One member to be nominated among the women working in talukas or tehsil, ward or municipality in the district.

**Complaints**

Section 9 of the sexual harassment of women at workplace (prevention, prohibition and redressal) Act states the complaint could be made by the harassed person. Any aggrieved woman within the period of thirty days from the date of incident may file a complaint of sexual harassment to the internal committee if so constituted or to the local committee if not so constituted .In case of series of incidents the complaint can be filed within the period of thirty days of last incident.

The matter between the aggrieved woman and the respondent can be settled through conciliation before the inquiry by local or internal committee as the case may be , the request of the aggrieved woman.

**Rise in sexual harassment complaints**

Recent reports shows that there has been a rise in sexual harassment cases in companies in FY19 than the previous years. over 90 companies showed a rise of 14 percent increase in sexual harassment complaints, this is a analysis done by the ComplyKaro services.

It can also be seen by this that the rise in sexual harrasments complaints has happened due the greater awareness of the law relating to the sexual harassment of women at workplace, but now the burden of proof is on the companies and they has to make sure that the right action will be taken in relation to this.

Data has also shown that women are getting into filing complaints against any unwelcome behaviour such as sexual harassment and they have started to open up rather than just remaining silent because of some factors such as shame , self respect.

According to the data given by ComplyKaro services that 823 cases of sexual harassment were reported in FY19 while 722 cases were reported a year ago. Big companies such as Wipro an IT major company has reported the highest number of cases, in FY19 Wipro reported 142 cases while in FY18 reported cases were 101. Many other companies such as ICICI Bank and tech giant Infosys showed absolute reduction in numbers with the private lender reporting 40 cases lesser in FY19 and IT major reporting 8 cases lesser in fiscal.

We can also note that the rise in sexual harassment complaints also show the increased participation of women in these companies and these rising of complaints implies the greater awareness of the law relating to the sexual harassment of women at workplace. POSH act has helped many women to get relief and there is a need to make people more aware about it , even though being bold people doesn&#39;t know there rights , there is a requirement of systematic and an organised approach as we can see that the number of pending complaints increased to 14 percent in FY19 from 11 percent a year ago
# 

**Challenges to implement POSH provisions**

1. **Lack of awareness about the POSH act:-**

There is a need to speed awareness about the said act and its provisions. people need to know the difference between the harassment and sexual harassment, many people are unaware of what constitutes a sexual harassment.

In many cases the person who has been sexually harassed is not aware of her rights , when and where she has to report. Sometimes even after being fully aware of the act and the rights provided by it, the victim does not report the case because of society, as they would see her from wrong perspective.

2. **Standard of proof:-**

it is necessary to provide the guidelines regarding the qualification of evidence. Most of the cases take place in private and over there there is no written proof or anything that can be considered as an evidence. The committee has to rely on probabilities and facts leading each other to the commission of the harassment.

3. **Gender neutral:-**

If we look at the international perspective of protection and prevention of people from sexual harassment ,both men and women has been guaranteed the protection from the sexual harassment, but in India POSH act provides safeguards to the women only. This is done because generally in India women are only the ones who are the victims.

4. **Lodging of fir with the internal investigation:-**

Sometimes the victim lodges the fir in parallel to the ongoing investigation by the investigation committee, in such situations the employer may face some difficulties but there should never be any attempt to save neither the offender nor the victim. The IC can vigilantly continue the investigation after they provide the report to the police if the police summons are issued.

5. **Vague annual reports**

IC has to prepare and send the annual report on total numbers of cases , cases resolved , pending cases and how many cases has been resolved in last 90 days. The problem here is the sometimes IC doesn&#39;t know where to submit reports , this can lead to leaking of data and breach of confidentiality

6. **Efforts of the society.**

As a part of the society we also have to put efforts in eradicating the sexual harassment, and make this a permanent and an effective system. Where we lack is , if we ever get to know about anything like we always remain silent until that happens with us. we need to understand we should always be in support of the person being harassed and help them in raising their voice by giving them our voice.

**Judicial response.**

Judiciary plays the most important role in functioning , regulation and interpretation of a law. Mere creating a law does not work , it requires to serve the purpose it was created for and a justice dispensing system can only do that. Likewise judiciary also needs to serve their purpose of dispensing justice and it don&#39;t do so , it is like fire without heat , a house without bricks. The Indian judiciary through its activist role has changed a lot in last few years.

Indian judiciary has started to utilise the activist oriented approach for interpretation of laws.

**Notable judgements prior to Vishakha&#39;s case.**

Shahnaz worked as a ground staff at a gulf based airlines, things started to become miserable when the new station manager joined

and passed obscene remarks and comments. She was asked to stay update at the job after 10pm , when she refused all the demands things got worst even more , she was given memos of mistakes, refused promotions and was assigned low level tasks. Even complaint to the superiors didn&#39;t

helped , at a party the new station manager hid her bag so that she could stay up a bit late and grabbed her and thrust a cigarette into her mouth her colleagues rescued her that day, when she returned to Bombay she found pre-dated dismissal letter and a bunch of fabricated memos.

Shahnaz challenged her dismissal in the labour court ,charged her employers with sexual harassment proceedings that took several years. She had documents to prove her side and all the colleagues of her deposed in her favour in the court , the company meet on pressurising the people that they came back to the court. Luckily on 16 april 1996, the labour court awarded Shahnaz favourable reinstatement.

Judgement : The company to reinstate the workman with full back wages and continuity of her services with effect from 25 - 07- 1985 that is the date of her dismissal with all the attendant benefits. The saudi airlines then appealed to high court and the high court also held that , she has been harassed by the management and directed the airlines to give her full back wages and a plea for division bench in high court was also rejected.

In the case of Rupan Deol Bajaj vs Kanvar Pal Singh Gill AIR 1996 SC 309 : 1996 Cri. L.J.381 , Rupan Deol Bajaj and Kanvar Pal Singh Gill were IAS officer and Director general of police of state of punjab , both were at a dinner at another government officer&#39;s place , there Gill asked Deol that he wanted to talk to her over something so deol (victim) grabbed chair and Gill pulled her chair close to her chair and then the victim realised something wrong and went back to sit at her original place , again the accused came to her and stood so close to her as he was only 4 inches away from her knees. again the victim commanded her to go with him and stood so close that she could not get up from her chair without touching him so she immediately drew her chair back and stood up again objected his obnoxious behaviour and the moment she tried to leave the accused slapped at her posterior. The victim filed a fir against the accused under sections 341, 342, 352, 354 and 509 of indian penal code, the high court dismissed the plea and stated the reason for it that, this is a case of section 95 that says , &quot;Nothing is an offence by reason that it causes , any harm, if that harm is so slight that no person of ordinary sense and temper would complain of such harm&quot; and thus the high court of Punjab and Haryana quashed the complaint saying this is just a slight harm

. When the appeal went to the honourable supreme court , it reversed the order of the high court of Punjab and Haryana on the grounds of accused&#39;s behaved wrongly and in that behaviour there was presence of men&#39;s rea as the accused repeatedly did try to convince the victim to go with and drew her chair next to him twice and stood close to him and even slapped her posterior as she was trying too leave. drawing chair close and standing close with inches of gap between may be considered a slight harm but slapping the posterior in front of people is enough to give someone mental trauma.

**Notable judgements post vishkha&#39;s case.**

Vishakha&#39;s case caused a nationwide discourse on sexual harassment at workplace. The first case after the vishakha and ors vs state of rajasthan was apparel export promotion councilvs A.K Chopra, in this case the supreme court of India reiterated the law laid down in Vishakha&#39;s judgement and vindicated the dismissal of a superior officer of the Delhi based apparel promotion council, who was found guilty of sexually harassing a subordinate female employee. The court cleared that only physical contact is not necessary to constitute a sexual harassment , it is also unwelcome sexual behaviour , demand or request of sexual favours, any verbal or non verbal conduct with sexual overtones whether directly or indirectly whose submission or rejection which can be use affect the woman&#39;s employment.

**Medha Kotwal Lele and Ors vs Union of India and Ors.**

In this case Dr. Medha Kotwal Lele of a NGO named &quot;Aalochana&quot; wrote a letter which accentuated numbers of individual cases of sexual harassment which also underscored the non implementation of Vishakha guidelines across the country. The court used that letter as a writ petition and directed the state governments to file affidavits focusing on the steps taken by them in implementing the Vishakha guidelines.

This the response the judiciary gave and is giving to the POSH act through its activism and directing state governments to implement the Vishakha guidelines effectively.

**Conclusion**

The sexual harassment of women at workplace (prevention, prohibition and redressal) act was passed in 2013 with the objective of

maintaining work friendly , safe and better work environment for women. The duties of a employer is to make the workplace as according to the Vishakha guidelines and make their employees aware about it. There shall be two complaints committee the internal and local complaints committee. There has been a rise in sexual harassment complaints in companies according to the data shared by complykaro services which also highlights the increased amount of awareness among people about the Posh law. The judiciary has helped the most in proper implementation of Vishakha guidelines.

The implementation of POSH law has been done very effectively by every department of either public sector or private sector but still there are some challenges to the implementation of the POSH act.
